[Add] Transformers Updates (#3053)
huggingface/blog: faster-transformers.md

---

> title: "Updates in transformers that enabled gpt-oss" 

Reviewer: Ah let's use something more nuanced here, `Supercharge your transformers experience w/ ..`?

(not sure let me think a bit)

---
title: "Updates in transformers that enabled gpt-oss" 
thumbnail: blog/assets/faster-transformers/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: ariG23498
- user: sergiopaniego
- user: reach-vb
- user: pcuenq
- user: ArthurZ
- user: SaylorTwift
- user: cyrilvallez
---

# Updates in transformers that enabled gpt-oss

> OpenAI recently released their [GPT-OSS series of models](https://huggingface.co/collections/openai/gpt-oss-68911959590a1634ba11c7a4)
> on the Hugging Face Hub. While the models themselves are drawing significant attention from the open-source community,
> it was almost inevitable that the quieter updates in the [`transformers`](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/) library (which made these releases possible) went largely unnoticed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenAI recently released their [GPT-OSS series of models](https://huggingface.co/collections/openai/gpt-oss-68911959590a1634ba11c7a4). The models featured some novel techniques like MXFP4 quantisation, efficient kernels, New chat format and more. To enable gpt-oss, we upgraded [transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/)
 library to make it as efficient to load, run and fine-tune the model.
```
I don't like the negative tone that the updates were left unnoticed (suggestion to phrase it in a more positive light)

In this blog post, we won't be diving into how GPT-OSS itself works or how to fine-tune it
([here is a cookbook if you wanted to take a look](https://cookbook.openai.com/articles/gpt-oss/fine-tune-transfomers)),

> instead we focus on the concrete capabilities in `transformers` that power this release.

Reviewer: Same here, I'd flip the order here instead of starting we won't we can start with We will focus on capabilities etc and then say we won't dive into gpt-oss

This also showcases the transformers design approach. New features are usually motivated by innovative techniques from new models. We incorporate them as part of the `transformers` toolkit, so other models (current and future) can benefit from them too.

> Providing clean implementations of new methods allows the community to quickly understand and adopt them. Frameworks such as `MLX`, `llama.cpp` or `vLLM` can use `transformers` code as a reference to build their own implementations, and makes it easy for the community at large to converge on a high-level vocabulary that represents advances in the field. It also facilitates bug discovery and exploration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Providing clean implementations of new methods allows the community to quickly understand and adopt them. Frameworks such as [`MLX`](https://github.com/ml-explore/mlx-lm/pull/354), [`llama.cpp`](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp/discussions/15396) or [`vLLM`](https://docs.vllm.ai/projects/recipes/en/latest/OpenAI/GPT-OSS.html) can use `transformers` code as a reference to build their own implementations, and makes it easy for the community at large to converge on a high-level vocabulary that represents advances in the field. It also facilitates bug discovery and exploration.
```

For this release, we worked on:

- [Zero-build Kernels, downloadable from the Hub](#zero-build-kernels-downloadable-from-the-hub)
- [MXFP4 Quantization](#mxfp4-quantization)
- [Tensor Parallelism](#tensor-parallelism)
- [Expert Parallelism](#expert-parallelism)
- [Dynamic Sliding Window Layer & Cache](#dynamic-sliding-window-layer--cache)
- [Load larger models faster](#load-larger-models-faster)
- [Continuous Batching & Paged Attention](#continuous-batching--paged-attention)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Best part: Most of these features should work across all major models within Transformers!
```

## Zero-build Kernels, downloadable from the Hub

A kernel is a small, ***specialized*** program that runs directly on an accelerator to perform operations like matrix multiplications,
activations, or normalizations. In eager PyTorch, each operation launches its own kernel in sequence, simple, but inefficient due
to memory transfers and launch overhead. PyTorch 2.0 improved this with `torch.compile`, where backends like **`TorchInductor`**
fuse and optimize kernels automatically, often yielding 2–10× speedups.

But what if you need something beyond the default fused kernels, like a new operator or a hardware-tuned optimization?

> Writing custom GPU kernels is powerful but notoriously difficult. That’s where **Kernels from the Hub** comes in: you

Author: I see your point. Let me re-phrase this a bit.

can now build kernels with the [kernel-builder](https://huggingface.co/blog/kernel-builder) and share or consume them
directly via the [kernels package](https://huggingface.co/blog/hello-hf-kernels).

For `transformers`, this is a big shift. Historically, the library avoided native kernels as it had to depend on too
many separate PyPI packages. With Kernels from the Hub, there’s only **one lightweight dependency (`kernels`)**, and the

> whole system is community-centric. This means transformers can finally tap into optimized, shareable kernels without

Reviewer: ```suggestion
whole system is community-centric. This means transformers can tap into optimized, shareable kernels without
```

sacrificing simplicity or portability.

### Custom Kernels for GPT-OSS

[GPT-OSS](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/main/src/transformers/models/gpt_oss/modeling_gpt_oss.py),
a Mixture of Experts (MoE) model, is a real adapter of Kernels from the Hub. It leverages two customized kernels:

> - `@use_kernel_forward_from_hub("RMSNorm")`

Author: For RMSNorm you mean?

For GPT-OSS the norm kernels comes from liger and not triton.

> - `@use_kernel_forward_from_hub("RMSNorm")`

Reviewer 2: The triton kernels are the mxfp4 ones, covered later. But perhaps we can mention all of them here, then focus on the Liger+MoE via `use_kernels`, then mxfp4 (as done), and we should cover FA3 with sinks somewhere.

INFO:root:Using layer `MegaBlocksMoeMLP` from repo `kernels-community/megablocks`
```

In Figure 1, we show how well the kernels work with larger batch sizes. While for lower batch sizes it might seem that
it is not worthwhile to use kernels, you can see how well it does for larger batch sizes. 

| ![benchmark with and without kernels](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/faster-transformers/benchmark-kernels-with-without.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 1: Benchmarking results of custom kernels |

> Note: [Here is the benchmarking script](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/faster-transformers-scripts/blob/main/benchmark-kernels-with-without.py)

## MXFP4 Quantization

### Why quantize at all

Large language models are memory-hungry. Quantization reduces memory footprint by storing weights (and sometimes activations)
in lower-precision formats. For reference, FP32 uses 32 bits per number and BF16 uses 16. By reducing bit width, we trade
some precision for smaller models and faster memory movement.

If you want a visual primer on quantization trade-offs, [Maarten Grootendorst’s](https://huggingface.co/MaartenGr) article is excellent:

> [*A Visual Guide to Quantization*](https://newsletter.maartengrootendorst.com/p/a-visual-guide-to-quantization).

Reviewer 2: I'd say here that gpt-oss was _designed for mxfp4_ (if I'm not mistaken, we should verify). This means that there's really no precision loss as the model was trained for and is expected to run on mxfp4. This is a fundamental difference with the usual post-training quantization methods as it removes a lot of uncertainty and the need to adapt to your domain via calibration methods.

### What is MXFP4

| ![explanation of mxfp4 format](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/faster-transformers/mxfp4.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 2: The E2M1 format used in the MXFP4 format |

**MXFP4** is a 4-bit floating format with E2M1 layout: 1 sign bit, 2 exponent bits, and 1 mantissa bit, as shown in Figure 2.
On its own, E2M1 is very coarse. MXFP4 compensates with **blockwise scaling**:

- Vectors are grouped into blocks of 32 elements.
- Each block stores a shared scale that restores dynamic range when dequantizing.
- Inside each block, 4-bit values represent numbers relative to that scale.

This blockwise scheme lets MXFP4 keep range while using very few bits. In practice, GPT-OSS 20B fits in roughly `16 GB`
of VRAM and GPT-OSS 120B fits in roughly `80 GB` when MXFP4 is active, which is the difference between “cannot load” and

> “can run on a single high-end card.” The catch is that matrix multiplies now have to respect block scales. Doing this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
“can run on a single GPU.” The catch is that matrix multiplies now have to respect block scales. Doing this
```

I know your are referring to the 80GB, but 16GB for the 20B enables consumer gpus including Colab.

efficiently at scale requires dedicated kernels.

### MXFP4 in `transformers`

`transformers` has native MXFP4 support:

- **Quantizer logic:** [`quantizers/quantizer_mxfp4.py`](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/main/src/transformers/quantizers/quantizer_mxfp4.py)

> - **Integration hooks:** [`integrations/mxfp4.py`](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/main/src/transformers/integrations/mxfp4.py)

Reviewer 2: I'd use permalinks here.
Also, what does the reader need to focus on in these files? It's a bit intimidating otherwise, imo.
It's not immediately obvious that this is leveraging the triton mxfp4 kernels, which is a great segue to use from the previous section in my opinion.

You can inspect a model’s configuration to see whether MXFP4 is enabled:

```python
from transformers import GptOssConfig

model_id = "openai/gpt-oss-120b"

> cfg = GptOssConfig.from_pretrained(model_id)

Reviewer 2: would AutoConfig work?

Author: I think so, yes.

I wanted to make it GPT specific. If you would like I can replace with AutoConfig.

Reviewer 2: No strong opinion. My thought was to make it more reusable and generic and use stable high-level APIs.

print(cfg.quantization_config)

> # {'modules_to_not_convert': [...], 'quant_method': 'mxfp4'}

Reviewer: you can put the actual output here IMO

```

If `quant_method` is `"mxfp4"`, the model will use the MXFP4 pathway when possible.

> Note: You can now **save** the model directly to the Hub in MXFP4 format, thanks to [this PR](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/pull/40176)!

### Requirements and fallbacks

To run MXFP4 on GPU you typically need:

> 1. `accelerate`, `kernels`, and `triton>=3.4` installed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `accelerate`, `kernels`, and `triton>=3.4` installed. Note that Pytorch 2.8 already comes with triton 3.4, so you only need to manually install triton if using Pytorch 2.7.
```

> 2. NVIDIA GPU with compute capability ≥ 7.5 (Ampere or newer), or a compatible backend.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. NVIDIA GPU with compute capability ≥ 7.5. This goes all the way back to Tesla, so you can run gpt-oss-20b on the free tiers of Google Colab and Kaggle, and on many consumer GPUs.
```

(I didn't know what `a compatible backend` refers to, so suggested to remove; feel free to add back).

Author: This reads better, thank you for the suggestion.

> If these constraints are not met, `transformers` falls back to a higher-precision path (for example BF16), which uses about 4× the memory of MXFP4.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If these constraints are not met, `transformers` falls back to a higher-precision path (BF16 is used by default), which requires about 4× the memory of MXFP4.
```

The [snippet](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/faster-transformers-scripts/blob/main/memory-requirements-quantized-vs-dequantized.py) loads
GPT-OSS twice on CUDA: once with `Mxfp4Config(dequantize=True)` (heavier) and once in the default quantized path (lighter). Figure 3 shows the amount
of used VRAM after each load so you can visualize the savings.

| ![memory used with quantized vs dequantized models](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/faster-transformers/quantization.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 3: Memory requirements for the quantized and dequantized models |

### Kernels for MXFP4

Efficient MXFP4 requires kernels that understand 32-element blocks and their scales during GEMMs and fused ops.

> This is where **Kernels from the Hub** comes in again. `transformers` automatically pulls in the MXFP4-aware

Reviewer 2: In this case we don't need `use_kernels`, do you think it'd be necessary to clarify?

Author: Good point, never hurts to over-communicate.

Triton kernels from the community repository when you load a model that needs them. The repository will appear
in your local cache and will be used during the forward pass.

> Quick sanity check with the Hugging Face cache CLI:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Quick sanity check with the Hugging Face cache CLI, after running gpt-oss-20b on a GPU compatible with the triton mxfp4 kernels:
```

```shell
hf cache scan
```

Sample output:

```shell
REPO ID                          REPO TYPE SIZE ON DISK
-------------------------------- --------- ------------
kernels-community/triton_kernels model           536.2K
openai/gpt-oss-20b               model            13.8G
```

This indicates the MXFP4 kernels were fetched and are available for execution.

Let's run some benchmarks and see how well the MXFP4 kernels perform. In Figure 4, we see that the MXFP4 kernels are even better than the custom
MoE and RMSNorm kernels for larger batches.

| ![benchmark mxfp4 kernels](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/faster-transformers/benchmark-mxfp4.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 4: MXFP4 kernel benchmark |

> Note: [Here is the benchmarking script](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/faster-transformers-scripts/blob/main/benchmark-mxfp4-kernels.py)

## Tensor Parallelism

> Tensor Parallelism (TP) splits **tensors inside a layer** across multiple GPUs (or the hardware accelerator in question).
> Each GPU multiplies its shard in parallel, and collectives such as all-gather or all-reduce combine the partial results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tensor Parallelism (TP) splits **tensors inside a layer** across multiple GPUs.
Each GPU multiplies its shard in parallel, and then partial results are collected using all-gather or all-reduce operations.
```

This reduces per-GPU memory and keeps all GPUs working on the **same layer**, which improves throughput as sequence length

> or batch size grows. TP is communication-intensive and generally works best on a **single machine with fast intra-node links**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or batch size grow. TP is communication-intensive and generally works best on a **single machine with fast intra-node links**.
```

### What this enables in `transformers`

`transformers` implements TP directly in `from_pretrained`. You can start with the predefined plan:

```python
# run with: torchrun --nproc-per-node 4 tp_gpt_oss.py
import os
import torch
from torch import distributed as dist
from transformers import GptOssForCausalLM, PreTrainedTokenizerFast

> def initialize_process():

Reviewer: we can simplify by removing all this and just run directly with tp_plan auto?

    # torchrun exports: LOCAL_RANK
    local_rank = int(os.environ["LOCAL_RANK"])
    torch.cuda.set_device(local_rank)

>     dist.init_process_group(backend="nccl")

Reviewer 2: Isn't this done by `torchrun`?

        print(tok.decode(out[0][inputs["input_ids"].shape[-1]:]))

def main():
    initialize_process()
    try:
        run_inference()
    finally:
        dist.destroy_process_group()

if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

If you don’t have the infrastructure to run the above, here is what you can do to run it!

```bash
hf jobs run --detach --flavor l4x4 ghcr.io/astral-sh/uv:debian /bin/bash -c \
  "uv venv .venv --python 3.12 && \
  source .venv/bin/activate && \
  uv pip install --upgrade torch numpy transformers accelerate triton kernels && \
  wget https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/distributed/raw/main/tp_gpt_oss.py && \
  torchrun --nproc-per-node=4 tp_gpt_oss.py"
```

> Note: [`hf jobs`](https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface_hub/guides/jobs) is available for all Hugging Face PRO users.

Under the hood, `tp_plan="auto"` selects a predefined sharding recipe for each layer and wires the necessary
collectives. You can inspect the active plan with `print(model._tp_plan)` if you want to verify what is being sharded.

### **When to reach for TP**

Use TP when the model is too large for one GPU **and** you want **parallel compute**, not only memory placement.

> TP tends to scale throughput with more GPUs, especially for long sequences or larger batches. For a deeper systems
> view and how TP interacts with sequence or pipeline parallelism, the
> [Ultra-Scale Playbook](https://huggingface.co/spaces/nanotron/ultrascale-playbook) is a great overview.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TP tends to scale throughput with more GPUs, especially for long sequences or larger batches.
```

Repetitive since you link it below

> > Note: If you are curious about how TP differs from `device_map="auto"` (memory placement), this short [Stack Overflow answer](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/78852192/choose-available-gpu-devices-with-device-map) explains the distinction and when to use each.

Reviewer 2: Great answer!

> If you want to know more about TP, here are the two resources that are must reads:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to know more about TP, here are two must-read resources:
```

- [`transformers` guide](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/en/perf_infer_gpu_multi): Tensor parallelism, supported models, plans, and extension points.
- [Ultra-Scale Playbook](https://huggingface.co/spaces/nanotron/ultrascale-playbook?section=tensor_parallelism): background on TP and its relationship to other parallelism modes.

## Expert Parallelism

Expert Parallelism (EP) shards **experts inside MoE layers** across GPUs. Each token is routed to one or a few experts,
so only those experts run their feed-forward pass. Since experts are independent MLPs, we can place different
experts on different ranks and exchange only the hidden states for the routed tokens. This keeps the matrix multiplies

> intact on each rank and replaces tensor slicing with routing and collectives.

Reviewer 2: No strong opinion, but I'd maybe keep using `GPU` rather than `rank` in this description

Run with multiple processes using `torchrun`. EP is enabled via the distributed configuration and works
with GPT-OSS MoE layers out of the box in transformers.

```python
# run with: torchrun --nproc-per-node 4 ep_gpt_oss.py
import os
import torch
from torch import distributed as dist
from transformers import GptOssForCausalLM, PreTrainedTokenizerFast
from transformers.distributed import DistributedConfig

> def initialize_process():

Reviewer: Same here, let's simplify the snippet and make sure to call out that EP works by default when TP is enabled (IIRC)

Reviewer: AFAIR yes

  uv pip install --upgrade torch numpy transformers accelerate triton kernels && \
  wget https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/distributed/raw/main/ep_gpt_oss.py && \
  torchrun --nproc-per-node=4 ep_gpt_oss.py"
```

## Dynamic Sliding Window Layer & Cache

`transformers` now has a
[**`DynamicSlidingWindowLayer`**](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/64ae6e6b1de2c6822a53be46aba9db68f75ec595/src/transformers/cache_utils.py#L165)
and a **config‑aware [`DynamicCache`](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/64ae6e6b1de2c6822a53be46aba9db68f75ec595/src/transformers/cache_utils.py#L959)**.
If the model config declares sliding‑window or hybrid attention, the cache **stops growing past the window** for those layers;
if you don’t pass the config, behavior stays as before (full, ever‑growing KV).

This provides us with:

- **Much lower KV‑cache memory** for models with sliding or hybrid attention (e.g. GPT‑OSS).
Cache growth plateaus once the window is reached (e.g., 4K for Mistral; 128 for GPT‑OSS sliding layers), instead of
scaling linearly with total generated tokens. ([GitHub](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/pull/40039),

> [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/en/model_doc/mistral))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Transformers](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/en/model_doc/mistral))
```

- **Speed/latency wins** on long prompts/long generations: smaller KV tensors mean lighter attention reads/writes
and less memory bandwidth pressure, especially after the window is hit. (This is the central motivation behind
sliding‑window/hybrid LLMs.) ([AI21](https://www.ai21.com/blog/rise-of-hybrid-llms/),
[vLLM Blog](https://blog.vllm.ai/2025/08/05/gpt-oss.html))

### How to use it

> The optimized cache is set by default, that means **you would not have to make any changes** to your existing code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The optimized cache is set by default, that means **you don't have to make any changes** to your existing code.
```

> If you want to create the `DynamicCache` explicitly here is how you would do it:

Reviewer: We can put an output of `DynamicCache` here so that people get a peek into what parameters do we utilise

Author: I don't think this is a good idea as printing the DynamicCache would only suggest which layer uses `DynamicSlidingWindowLayer` and which uses `DynamicLayer`.

> If you want to create the `DynamicCache` explicitly here is how you would do it:

Author: I am pretty sure that all with hybrid/sliding window attention have been updated and this is now default.

## Load larger models faster

When you load a large model into your GPU, PyTorch needs to **reserve GPU memory for each layer’s weights**. Each of these requests (per layer) takes time,
and for multi-billion-parameter models it can mean **thousands of tiny memory allocations**, adding up to a long wait before the model is ready.
Instead of asking the GPU for new memory every single time, it can **hold on to a big chunk once** and then hand out slices from it quickly.

The allocator holds on to this big chunk and hands out slices. The catch is that the allocator only gets fast *after* you’ve given it some memory to work with.
If you don’t “stock the pantry” first, you still end up doing many slow trips to the market. The PR (🎉 [#36380](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/pull/36380))
teaches `transformers` to **pre-stock the pantry** before it starts copying model weights.

It:
- Looks at the `device_map` (where each layer will live).
- **Pre-allocates a big enough block on each GPU**.
- Then, as layers are copied in, they just slot neatly into this pre-reserved space.

This results in huge speedups in practice. The PR’s benchmarks showed model load times dropping

> from ~42 seconds to ~6 seconds for an 8B model — about **7× faster**.

Reviewer: We can update this stat for gpt-oss perhaps

Reviewer: you can ping Arthur he benchmarked it a bit so he'd remember it

| :--: |
| Figure 7: Static batching of sequences |

This type of batching sequences is called *static batching*. While this is simple and easy to understand, it
inherently comes with inefficiencies. Only after each sentence is completely generated can we move on to the next batch.

To bypass this issue, we use **dynamic batching** (also known as *continuous batching*). Instead of waiting
for all the generation to finish, we schedule incoming requests to the completed generations. That way,
as soon as a generation in a batch in complete, we prefill the batch with the next request. The process
looks like in Figure 8

| ![continuous batching](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/faster-transformers/dynamic-batching.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 8: Continuous Batching of sequences |

Transformers supports continuous batching and here is how to use it:

```bash
import argparse
import time

import datasets
import torch

from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer
from transformers.generation import GenerationConfig

> MODEL_ID = "Qwen/Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507"

Reviewer: yeah! okay to use qwen here - gpt-oss is still broken
